welcome to topcast and for a special
episode and probably what will become a
special series
on
stephen pinker's new book rationality
now i didn't really plan on making a
series about this it's only because well
it's been getting a lot of attention
recently stephen pink has been doing
lots of interviews and i know that
stephen pinker happens to be a great
admirer of the beginning of infinity as
well as david deutsch himself and so i
thought it'd be interesting to go
through his book on rationality because
the chapters really do cross over with
so much of what i've discussed here on
top cast not only is the book called
rationality and stephen pink is going to
have a particular take on what that
concept is all about
but well let's run through what the
chapter titles are and you can see why
i'd be drawn to it chapter one is called
how rational and animal chapter two
rationality and irrationality chapter 3
logic and critical thinking chapter 4
probability and randomness chapter 5
beliefs and evidence in brackets
bayesian reasoning
chapter six risk and reward rational
choice
chapter seven hits and false alarms
chapter eight the self and others which
is about game theory chapter nine
correlation causation chapter 10
what's wrong with people
chapter 11 why rationality matters
now stephen pinker will be familiar to
many of you for those who are unfamiliar
he's a harvard cognitive scientist his
original training is in
his original training
wikipedia tells me he's in psychology
he's got bachelors and a phd in that
area but he's the author of many popular
science books my favorite of those one
many of them are in the vein of the
beginning of infinity and my favorite
one of his recent ones is called the
better angels of our nature which is
basically about how
progress has indeed been occurring over
the last few
millennia centuries especially and it
appears to be increasing in the rapidity
with which it improves society and so i
have no disagreement with him on any of
those things and so a book like better
angels of that nature which explains
all of the trends that have been going
on technological scientific
moral that have been happening somewhat
relentlessly if not inevitably we don't
say that it's inevitable but it has been
occurring and that demands an
explanation an explanation which i would
argue
is quite well articulated in the work of
david deutsch in the beginning of
infinity but it's good to have other
optimists out there pointing out that
indeed things are getting better it
seems to be a minority opinion these
days despite the clarity with which we
can see and analyze these trends of
improvement so stephen pinker is
definitely on our side so to speak he
stands against the pessimist at least to
some extent and so it's good to have a
prominent ally like him and certainly as
i say he's been inspired by david deutch
he's praised publicly david deutsch and
his work on a number of occasions in
particular uh one of his other more
recent works called enlightenment now he
quotes david deutch and the beginning of
infinity quite heavily
okay top five science or psychology
books the book that i really enjoyed
partly because it resonated with
enlightenment now but from a different
angle is david deutsch's book the
beginning of infinity deutsch is a
theoretical physicist and this was a
book also on progress also on the
enlightenment but
unlike what i did which was to plot
graphs on you know life spans going up
death and disease going down and so on
even reasons really from first
principles how can we understand the
universe how is explanation possible
what drives science how does the human
mind stretch itself to do science and it
was it's a
uh
a profound weighty book but uh but not
filled with jargon or or
too much technical detail
also but also in enlightenment now he
does quote the humanist manifesto part
three from 2003 and he quotes the part
and i'll just read it where it says
knowledge of the world is derived by
observation experimentation and rational
analysis end quote that's from the
humanist manifesto now of course uh if
you're familiar with the work of david
deutsch your ears will prick up on that
word derived and i'm highlighting it now
because having read through
the book rationality
very quickly i read through it i've got
it in triplicate i've got it there in
paperback i've got it on my kindle which
is where i'll be reading from today and
i've got it on audiobook as well that
kind of helps me get through books like
this much more quickly than i otherwise
might but when i hear words like that
and pinker holds that up as being
a sort of maxim by which we can
judge rationality or not knowledge of
the world being derived by observation
etc
it makes me think well
to be generous maybe he just thinks that
the word derived means created so
knowledge of the world is created
through observation in some way in some
method without
judging what that method might be
in an ungenerous mood we might say well
he's just falling back on empiricism and
i think as we move through
rationality we'll see that there is a
deeply empiricist vein
in the philosophy that stephen pinker is
using in order to explain what
rationality is and so there will be some
quibbles that i will have at various
points about the extent to which
stephen pinker really understands how
knowledge is not only created but how we
can come to understand or obtain
objective knowledge i don't know that he
appreciates what people like let's say
karl popper have explained
how it is that knowledge is generated at
all and what knowledge more broadly
speaking might amount to and we're going
to see some well what i would plainly
call errors in epistemology early on all
of that said i still recommend the book
i think that if you are after a good
summary or if you've never been able to
afford
through expense or through distance or
through opportunity to be able to go to
one of these top american universities
and take on a course like critical
thinking or rationality taught by
an excellent academic like stephen
pinker then reading this book would be
an excellent substitute now i'm not
going to do a complete series of this
book as i've done for those other books
that i discuss i'm going to do about two
chapters at a time more or less he does
say that and quote from the preface of
the book pinker wrote quote this book
grew out of a course i taught at harvard
which explored the nature of rationality
and the puzzle of why it seems to be so
scarce end quote and as i read it i
thought yes indeed it reads like a
series of university lectures extremely
well written and of course it's going to
be well written because stephen pinker
wrote a book on how to write well and he
specializes in linguistics and writing
so i can certainly recommend this book
to people unfamiliar for example with
that anything that deutsch or popper
have ever written and who might be new
to critical thinking and what to have an
insight into what perhaps
university academics think critical
thinking is or think rationality is and
what university students would be
consuming in their lectures and
tutorials if they take on a course about
let's say philosophy or critical
thinking at the undergraduate level but
if you so if you can't afford to have
ever gone to harvard university say due
to time or money or location then this
is an excellent substitute i would argue
now the book is titled rationality but
if i could give it a long academic
subtitle it would be something like
perceived errors in thinking
using contemporary examples drawn from
political matters especially important
in the united states in the early 2020s
now that might be terribly ungenerous of
course many of the errors that pinker is
going to discuss throughout this book
errors in thinking for example are
indeed timeless
even if many of the examples won't be i
i personally have a preference for more
timeless works or works that can be
basically picked up by anyone at any
time without needing a huge amount of
background knowledge about the current
affairs going on in a particular time or
location when and where the book was
written and this is why i think most of
for example popper's works stand the
test of time and of course both of
david's books are eminently like this
hopefully what naval and i have done on
that podcast of his is like this and
what if you ever listened to jocko
willink he does these wonderful history
wartime podcasts which you could pick up
in the year 3000 and i think they would
still stand on their own as great
reflections on the conflicts of the past
and the reason i have this preference is
that i think that an author or a
podcaster for example who wants to
create a product that does stand the
test of time needs the benefit of
hindsight and that won't be possible
while you're still either within the
events of the day or immediately after
the events of the day and in many cases
i'd say even 10 years after the big
events of our time
won't be long enough and i'm i'm just
laboring this because rationality the
book rationality has references to
particular politicians and particular
national or sometimes global events and
events that
happen to still be in progress in a
sense i guess professor pinker is trying
to navigate some of the most difficult
issues and attempting to clarify ways of
thinking best about these contemporary
issues now before i begin by reading
some excerpts from the book and making
some comments about those excerpts i
just might make a few more remarks
before i begin stephen pinker professor
pinker like matthew riley is often
spoken about as being one of our
prominent optimists and i think that's
quite right absolutely these public
intellectuals are optimists of a kind
but not always in the vein in which the
beginning of infinity describes what
optimism is remember what that is that
is that all evils are due to a lack of
knowledge it's this deep understanding
that we can solve problems problems are
soluble that's the sense in which we
talk about optimism as being linked to
knowledge and the knowledge is linked to
physics because if there's not a
physical law it's not a law of physics
actually standing in your way of solving
the problem that problem is soluble and
evil including things that cause
suffering are just a kind of problem
just a kind of thing that we need to
turn our knowledge-creating abilities
towards and so that's what we mean about
optimism in the case of stephen pinker
he's written one of the most popular
books on why we should indeed have hope
and gratitude
for the now for the time in which we are
living because the past was of course so
much worse
it's amazing that needs to be said but
it does need to be said because we are
living in an era i think unusually where
things have never been better but
they're talked about as if they're
getting worse or that they've never been
as bad as what they are now and yet
things are getting better you know and i
i include everything from the economic
to the moral
to the cultural even the political and
the environmental and so on and so forth
on every metric
things are better than ever i think
steven pinker understands this almost as
much as anyone i'd say almost as much
because those of us who've read and
fully consumed the beginning affinity
will be able to spot times throughout
the work rationality
where there seems to be a sense that
things are in fact getting worse and
have been getting worse for a while but
i think that this comes down to a kind
of political bias
in a sense that because certain
political leaders have recently come to
prominence that other people think are
beyond the pale then this is an
indication that the entire democratic
system for example is going to hell and
things are getting worse and i think
that's just an error i think that's an
irrationality but it comes through at
certain points within the book and we'll
see that so
also just before i get to chapter one
what would i say rationality is and how
did it accord with what stephen pinker
says
it is in this book i suppose what i
would say is that rationality is a
commitment
to correcting errors to identifying and
then correcting errors something like
that i think that's the way that the
beginning of infinity kind of frames
what rationality is and there are many
ways in which we might try to identify
and then go about correcting our errors
and if we are consistently trying to do
this then we're consistently aiming for
a rational world view and the difference
with reason is reason is
all of those techniques which allow us
to do that error correction sometimes
they can be used synonymously you know
if you say to someone well that would be
the rational thing to do you might also
say that would be the reasonable thing
to do and i think that these words you
know we can't have a perfectly precise
language these words are more or less
interchangeable but it's about error
correction okay we we should expect that
all of our ideas contain
some areas somewhere or other and the
process of trying to identify them is a
rational process the process of
correcting them is a rational process
but this might be a just a subtle
difference in emphasis when it comes to
what stephen pinker has to say about
what rationality is so with all of that
preamble let's get into chapter one it's
titled again in the form of a question
it's titled how rational and animal
question mark and in this chapter pinker
rightly says that we owe our progress
and he lists some of these in terms of
moral and scientific process he we owe
this progress
to our being rational to human beings
being rational now of course i would say
we could clock it up to that that's
totally fine or we could clock it up to
our being creative especially our
capacity for creating explanatory
knowledge okay and so that's what makes
us different to every other entity in
the entire universe whether that entity
is
creating knowledge or not if it does
create knowledge explanatory knowledge
then it's a person by virtue of that
fact and so that is what enables the
progress to occur and that that very
capacity that very capacity of being
creative because it's not perfect and
because it's error-prone might be well
it is it's also going to be the process
that will lead to
error because you are guessing what the
nature of reality is you're making your
best reasonable or rational guess and
you're trying to correct errors that's
not a perfect process and so sometimes
it will go wrong and when it does go
wrong well
someone might diagnose that error as
being a kind of a rationality
irrationality
but not always just a simple mistake
might not be irrational it might have
been your best guess at the time i can
certainly imagine deliberately using
falsehoods in a perfectly rational way
newtonian gravity is one such okay we
know technically speaking strictly
speaking it is at root false
demonstrably false experimentally
refuted however it would be perfectly
rational and it is perfectly rational to
use it in order to fire rockets into
space and there might be reasons why the
more correct version general relativity
might be irrational to use for example
if you're a kid and you're building a
rocket and you you just want to try and
predict how high the rocket's going to
go using newtonian gravity could be a
wonderful way in which to get interested
in the physics of rocketry but if
someone was to say well technically
newtonian physics isn't true you should
be using einstein's gravity then it
might take you months to learn the
formulas and the mathematics and the
formalism in order to make the same
prediction using the more accurate
theory of physics the more true theory
of physics so there will be reasons why
you might rationally discard what is
true and embrace what is false in order
to
pragmatically achieve what you want to
achieve and make progress in the world
individually or more broadly than that
okay that aside
in this chapter one
people get credit for making progress
and it is insinuated said that uh people
are special aside from other animals he
does say and i find this a little bit
obtuse that some
native hunters the sand people i believe
in africa quote
owe their survival to the scientific
mindset
they reason their way from fragmentary
data to remote conclusions with an
intuitive grasp of logic critical
thinking statistical reasoning causal
inference and game theory end quotes
so this is
people who are still living a tribal
lifestyle who are hunting in the african
plains in order to live so they are
pre-agrarian they don't have farming and
so on
now this impulse and this this happens
across documentaries and it's just a a
feature of our culture it's a feature of
western culture that we
praise
pre-technology or or
pre-scientific pre-enlightenment
cultures as having precisely the same
level of development as what we do it's
just that they are doing different
things now absolutely they have
precisely the same anatomical brains as
what we do absolutely they have minds
that are capable of understanding
anything that we do absolutely
but they don't have the same ideas that
we do there are strict differences
between cultures
some people use their capacity
for understanding the world their
universal capacity for explaining
phenomena in the world for things other
than doing that for things other than
relentlessly correcting their errors and
therefore making progress in the world
so over the last well in this case
apparently a hundred thousand years this
same extant society has been roughly the
same for the last hundred thousand years
they still exist we would say in our
terminology this is a static type of
society it hasn't changed much it's not
dynamic there's no one in that society
that is building rockets to go into
space there's no one in that society
that's building ever better batteries
for
solar powered cars it is building ever
faster processors for smartphones and
that kind of thing that's what we're
doing so we are cha we are undergoing
rapid change and that's the thing that
distinguishes us from all other
societies namely that we are able to
sustain to maintain
rapid progress we our society remains
stable under rapid change which is a
very unusual thing and this is hence why
david has this term of a dynamic society
it should be
unstable it should be the case seemingly
that if you have these
sudden changes in society technological
moral you have this progress going on
that it should cause great instability
and the society completely falls apart
and indeed in the past we can see
examples of that having happened but in
hours that hasn't happened yet because
we have this culture of criticism now
what's that got to do with what is being
said here well pinker is saying of this
tribe an ancient tribe that still exists
an ancient tribe that still relies upon
primitive hunting techniques
rather than being technologically
advanced like us
i would say that the reason they still
exist is
thus far they have the culture okay not
the individual people the culture has
been kind of lucky in the sense that
there hasn't been
sudden changes in the environment
there's been gradual and slow changes
but if they were to encounter a sudden
change a disease for example for which
they had no natural immunity unless the
west came along with some kind of
vaccine or with some kind of other
treatment then they would have to rely
upon their existing cultural knowledge
because their
means by which they create knowledge
happens only very gradually
i say all of that because when
pinker says that they are using all of
these things it is kind of trying to
praise the ancient tribe
in terms that we are familiar with but
is it true to say they are really using
a scientific mindset what's a scientific
mindset isn't a scientific mindset
something that
corrects errors in all areas isn't it
about using experiments to distinguish
between the best explanations so far
guessed can they really explain the
world around them they do have minds
that are very similar to ours okay and
you could take any person
from that society put them into western
society society and with some difficulty
okay the cultural difficulties will be
difficult to overcome but they would be
able to learn everything that we can
learn of course they would their mind is
universal just as our mind is universal
the thing is it's not so interesting
what is similar
about a person in the west who is using
a smartphone and driving a tesla and
dreaming one day of going into space
and the person still living on the tribe
who's never seen a smartphone before
wouldn't know what a tesla is
and still has a prehistoric view of what
the nature of the cosmos is yes there
are absolutely similarities there the
more interesting thing is why are there
differences in the culture what's going
on there at the level of rationality and
reason how do we explain the differences
in the ideas and what has led to those
ideas persisting or changing or not over
time that's the curious thing here and
of course what i would say is this
culture of criticism and the
primacy placed upon
trying to generate explanatory knowledge
rather than relying upon
rules of thumb which resemble some kind
of explanatory knowledge like pinker
lists game theory and statistical
reasoning but for me that just reeks
here of the fallacy of the noble savage
the idea that the hunter-gatherer
societies can be explained more or less
by precisely the same kinds of knowledge
as a modern western civilization that
seems strange to me there must be an
underlying explanation in terms of ideas
or is it i guess some combination
perhaps of imperialism and theft is that
that would be a common way of explaining
why
tribes remain in the state that they are
the only reason that they don't have
access to
free and universal healthcare for
example is because of some kind of
imperialist
attacks from the west on them that are
keeping them in that state or the
relativist argument that
their condition is just as good as ours
says society is just as good as ours in
all respects and no one should ever feel
sorry for a child born in that society
as compared to born in our society they
are just as able to thrive and flourish
in that society as we are and of course
i think this is completely false that if
truly given the choice a person who is
living in a
pre-industrial society on the plains of
africa hunting wildebeest in order to
survive would jump at the opportunity of
living somewhere in the united states
wealthy and safe and healthy now pinker
goes on in chapter one to say and quote
he says quote the cognitive wherewithal
to understand the world and bend it to
our advantage is not a trophy of western
civilization it is the patrimony of our
species end quote and
yes to some extent yes the cognitive
wherewithal is certainly there it's
there in every human no matter where
they are from what part of the earth
this is what makes things like racism so
ridiculous irrational and abhorrent
because every single individual person
has exactly the same as he says there
cognitive wherewithal to understand the
world
the question then becomes
why do some people really truly want to
understand the world why are those
people found in the west and why if you
are born into one of these
more pre-industrial societies that still
exist whether in the forests of brazil
or the plains of africa
or the deserts of australia
why do these people
not strive to
really understand for example the laws
of physics to aspire to have the next
best iphone that's released to get an
ever faster more powerful tesla and so
on and so forth what's the difference
well it's not the cognitive wherewithal
is it
it can't be that because we've admitted
that it's the same it's the same
universal mind operating in all of these
brains no matter what the
particular race if you like i don't uh
subscribe to this notion of race i think
ridiculous we are the human race no
matter what the background of ethnicity
is the cognitive wherewithal is the same
the mind is the same
so then
what makes the difference what makes the
difference is the knowledge and the
ideas and in particular the knowledge
about knowledge hence the importance of
the theory of knowledge okay so if you
have this stance of
wanting to criticize the ideas that are
out there for the purpose of improving
therefore if you have a tradition of
criticism in your society the society
overall will improve
and what we say is the difference is the
existence of a tradition of criticism in
one society the west and the rank
rejection of criticism of ideas in these
more
pre-industrial societies the
pre-industrial societies for everything
that pinker said there let's just go
back the list of things that he says
that they use
they have an intuitive grasp of logic
critical thinking hmm statistical
reasoning causal inference and game
through so apparently they're using all
of these things and he uses the example
of hunting he's saying that when they're
hunting something they're using all of
these things
i don't know that they really do use
critical thinking in the way that we
might think about it or the way that
i've tried to explain here in this
podcast series it was just my most
recent podcast where i talked about the
existence of the chief and the medicine
man
there as authorities are people who in
the tribe would tell everyone else what
to do often the medicine man would tell
the chief and the chief would then order
everyone else to follow this particular
piece of wisdom
false though it might be sometimes
useful sometimes not but the point is
rarely were people able to
defy the chief and the medicine man
there'd be very severe and violent
punishments in these tribal societies
for going against the authorities
you couldn't simply criticize in an
open-ended way every single idea so the
extent to which there is this true
culture
of criticism is open to debate maybe
there were
sections about which
tribal society can think maybe hunting
wildebeest you're allowed to think
critically about hunting the wildebeest
but you better not think critically
about how this society is organized for
example or whether and to what extent
you can leave the tribe and go somewhere
else that for example or how it is that
the children are raised in that
particular society and so on and so
forth so it's not like this universal
application of those things that pinker
lists
would actually happen in these tribes so
when pinker talks about the these things
are not a trophy of western civilization
the mind is not the mind has been gifted
to us by evolutionary processes that's
where the mind comes from would be my
guess
maybe there's also something to be said
for the way in which children are raised
early on and certain memes need to be
incorporated into the infant's mind so
that they can think broadly about these
issues i'm not so sure i think maybe
just every baby is born with the
capacity of having a universal mind i
think that just happens whatever if
we're talking about trophies of
civilization when it comes to
rationality absolutely
absolutely it is a trophy of western
civilization that we have a tradition
of
criticism that is a bright line between
dynamic societies societies that have
this open-ended exploration of the space
of ideas
to whittle down what is false from what
is more true
and societies that remain static that do
not have this and that tend eventually
to go extinct so whether these saan
people that
is used as an example here by pinker
whether they will persist off into the
future
has everything to do with the extent to
which they will embrace a tradition of
criticism and when they do they'll be
part of the west
and they won't be hunter-gatherers
anymore because they will choose not to
be because the rational thing would be
to choose to do those things which
enabled you to be
happier healthier wealthier wiser
people want progress people want to
solve their problems including
people who live in pre-industrial
societies and it is
incumbent on us we're wrong to not offer
them that
certainly we shouldn't force it on them
but the this this tendency to
be utterly hands off and to not even
show them that there is a better way i
think is immoral so as i say
brains of people around the world are
more or less anatomically identical
we're all of the same species we're all
of the same race so we have the same
kind of brains
so it has to be that the ideas that
people have is the difference
in the culture that causes the
difference between these different
societies and that difference is the
thing that's worth lingering on in any
book about rationality but what i'm
finding is that pinker emphasizes how
they are scientifically minded they're
critical thinkers who use bayesian
reasoning and they're good
conservationists as well they they
they embrace reciprocity and the
collective well-being of the tribe they
keep all that in mind
it's as if
reading this first bit in chapter one
their existence the the tribal existence
sounds almost utopian in how ideal it is
painted i'm almost left wondering after
reading about these
saan tribe people from africa still
remaining as hunter-gatherers i'm left
at the end wondering why
given their wonderful capacity and
thinking all these ways why
why they don't have the flying cars yet
and and and it's buttress this
discussion of the the virtues of the sun
people are buttressed
uh very quickly up against our people in
our society who are subject to
gambling and the irrationality of
gambling and and of embracing fake news
for example so i guess what pinker is
saying from an evolutionary point of
view as is his style is that if indeed
our brains and minds have evolved for
survival and ancient tribes manage that
so well that for example in this
particular example is using
that tribe has remained in existence for
a hundred thousand years a hundred
thousand years of continuous success in
the same place they've had why is it
that that same mind that allows for the
continual survival of that particular
tribe
also leads in the modern world to all of
our bad ideas that we have like fake
news and the tendency to buy lottery
tickets well what i would say in
response to that is i think there's no
great mystery here there is no great
mystery there's irrationalities in the
tribe and there's rationalities in
western civilization and vice versa
rationality is an application of
creativity and creativity is going to
produce error as much in fact no not as
much it's going to produce error more
often than it generates the correction
of an error correction of errors is
quite hard generating errors is quite
easy and it's going to happen in both
places at high rates in some societies
there is less ability to
correct errors simply because of the way
that children are raised to think
outside the box beyond what is permitted
to think about for example simply
leaving the society might be a taboo so
long as the climate does not change too
much and too fast a static society can
remain in existence for a long time it
can persist but it always remains
vulnerable to the inevitable change that
will indeed come our society only our
society has so far proved so resilient
in the face of rapid change
because we have this error correcting
mechanism that operates at all levels of
our society from the individual through
to
institutions and their leaders the sand
people have been resilient
but only under very slow change in the
climate and the world around it if there
was a terrible flood as i say or a
disease or a war tomorrow
they could in all likelihood be wiped
out by something that would not wipe us
out now chapter one um also sees pinker
discuss some simple math and logic
problems i'll i'll i'll mention one of
those but i won't steal these thunder by
going through all of them you should get
the book for that they're very
interesting he says that people make
mistakes with these sorts of simple
maths and logic problems for various
reasons he quotes kahneman and the
thinking fast and slow idea there's this
idea that there's system one that's for
rapid thinking and that seduces us into
the wrong answer for many of these
simple questions when what we really
want is to engage system two which is
the
slow and deliberate way of thinking
about and understanding the problem
behind such questions i often personally
find all these sorts of examples a bit
strange i've written before about
certain logical maps problems that
people make a big deal about for example
this one the singapore maths problem
sometimes these things can be subtle and
difficult to understand it's a skill
like mathematics and physics like music
these things these techniques of solving
these problems
have to be learned some people are
interested
in spending
lots of time
they have fun doing these things you
know i used to be like this but others
don't whether or not being able to think
well about some abstract logic puzzle
whether or not that translates into
thinking well about your own life
decisions or decisions that should be
made politically in broader society
i would say is at best an open question
but more than likely you can see
wonderful examples of people who are
brilliantly mathematically and logically
minded in the abstract sense who
struggle to understand some simple
concepts and in fact in fact pinker
himself is going to um discuss paul
erdis who's this prolific mathematician
and he's got this wonderful anecdote in
in the book about this and i i can't
wait to get to that one because it's
something i learned new about paulettish
i didn't know about this we'll come back
to that but take for example i'm ted
kaczynski uh a famous mathematician not
so much famous for his mathematics
although no one can doubt his
mathematical proficiency but he was the
unabomber right so this is a guy who
could understand logic and mathematics
and reason
abstractly quite well but ended up being
a terribly violent anti-social hostile
person who didn't understand the first
thing about morality it would seem and
so much can be said about well the
people who crashed planes into the twin
towers as sam harris has made this point
so eloquently many times these people
some of them were phds and engineers and
that kind of thing having the ability to
think rationally
in the way that is sometimes explained
rationally
even having the capacity to solve these
logic problems is no bulwark against
having bad ideas it's the bad ideas that
you can embrace that you think you've
embraced rationally in fact you might
have embraced rationally you know again
sam harris makes this point that if you
are a religious fundamentalist then you
only have to accept for whatever
weird reason to you it might be rational
but if you genuinely think that paradise
awaits
if only you blow yourself up in a
suicide bombing and that not only is
this good for you because you'll go to
paradise but you'll be helping these
infidels also learn the lesson
that this is the
set of ideas they need to embrace in
order to secure an eternity of paradise
and holiness and sacredness and all that
kind of thing so that that is
rationality rationality and perfect
service to evil rationality of that kind
now i would say of course well these
people aren't trying to correct errors
and these people don't have an error
correcting mindset what they're doing is
closing off
they are closing off any possibility of
error correction once you kill someone
you've completely closed off the
capacity to correct errors and some of
these people of course they're
dogmatists they don't think it's
possible to correct an error which is
why i say rationality is
better thought of better thought of as
this desire to identify and correct
errors and as soon as you
um
david deutscher's moral injunction right
as soon as you say
um
i don't there is no error to correct
here or you're not permitted to correct
an area here the the anti-rational idea
of destroying the means of error
correction that's truly what is
anti-rational or irrational even but
certainly anti-rational it prevents you
from being able to
think about ways in order to make
progress by correcting errors okay so
here in this chapter one there is one
example um i'll just mention of the the
way in which people can sometimes
uh not think logically but as i say i'm
not sure it really makes the point that
um
that people are irrational for example
okay the the problem is this
um
imagine you've got a patch of weeds
on a field somewhere and you are told
this patch of weeds
doubles its size every single day and
it's not until the 30th day that the
entire field is covered by weeds okay so
we've got that i want you to think about
it for a moment we've got this patch of
weeds it's doubling in size every single
day and on the 30th day the field is
completely covered the question then is
how long does it take for half of the
field to be covered by weeds
now i'll give you a moment
so it's being doubled so the patch of
weeds is doubling every day
for 30 days at which point it covers the
entire field how long did it take for
half of the field to be covered
well the answer is
29 days right so 29 days is how long it
takes now sometimes this can seem
surprising to people but of course if
you think to yourself well on the 30th
day it's completely full so
if it doubled every day how much of the
field was
covered the day before the 30th day
normally the 29th day well half of it
because on the 29th day it will double
and then the entire field will be
covered so but some people think you
know i don't know i suppose some people
will think 15 days or something like
that
now why would this appear in a book on
rationality well i think i think that
and there's a series of these questions
again get the book for
more examples of these questions that
pinker is drawing from elsewhere
to illustrate a particular point but
what is that point well i think it's the
point that if people don't
have a ready understanding of a question
like that
then the diagnosis is well they won't
have a good understanding of things more
broadly like exponential growth when it
comes to an issue like and he will come
back to this covert so people will be
irrational about covert y because i
don't understand exponential growth why
because i can't do a simple problem like
how long it takes for the weeds to cover
half of a field
well maybe
maybe but like i say like i say
people like ted kaczynski can be
perfectly proficient
mathematicians
and simultaneously be completely
irrational so
these two things sometimes don't marry
up it's it's what else you know i think
it's what else you know that really
helps with this kind of thing okay so
that aside my favorite example and so
this is the only other one i'll draw
from but he spends a long time on this
and i've spent some time on this before
on previous podcasts as well
a certain kind of failure of logic which
i think is more
illustrative of people's capacity to
think
in a
certain kind of logical way or is it
because um as pinker himself is going to
get to there's a better way of
expressing this same problem in ways
that people typically are able to get
the correct answer so it's got to do
with
the degree to which something is
abstract versus concrete as we might say
in educational circles so i'm actually
going to read from the book as i um do
with certain other books um so
i'll begin it's called the that this
test is a famous one it's called the
wasson selection test
and it's titled in uh pinker's book a
simple logic problem quote
if anything lies at the core of
rationality it must surely be logic he
says
the prototype of a rational inference is
the syllogism if p then q
p therefore q consider a simple example
suppose the coinage of a country has a
portrait of one of its eminent
sovereigns on one side and a specimen of
its magnificent fauna on the other
now consider a simple if-then rule if a
coin has a king on one side then it has
a bird on the other here are four coins
displaying a king a queen a moose and a
duck
which of the coins do you have to turn
over to determine whether the rule has
been violated if you're like most people
you said the king or the king and the
duck
the correct answer is the king and the
moose
why
everyone agrees you have to turn over
the king
because if you fail to find a bird on
the reverse it would violate the rule in
so many words most people know there's
no point in turning over the queen
because the rule says if king then bird
it says nothing about coins of the queen
many say you should turn over the duck
but when you think about it that coin is
irrelevant the rule is if king then bird
not if bird then king if the duck shared
the coin with a queen nothing would be
amiss
but now consider the moose if you turned
that coin over and found a king on the
obverse the rule if king then bird would
have been transgressed the answer then
is the king and the moose on average
only 10 of people make those picks the
watson selection task named after its
creator the cognitive psychologist peter
wassen has been administered with
various if p then q rules for 65 years
the original version used cards with a
letter on one side and a number on the
other and a rule like if there is a d on
one side there is a three on the other
time and again people turn over the p
or the p and the q and fail to turn over
the not q
it's not that they're incapable of
understanding the right answer as with
the cognitive reflection test as soon as
it is explained to them they slap
themselves on the forehead and accept it
but their unreflective intuition
left to its own devices fails to do the
logic
what does this tell us about human
rationality a common explanation is that
it reveals our confirmation bias the bad
habit of seeking evidence that ratifies
a belief and being in curious about the
evidence that might falsify it people
think that dreams are omens because they
recall the time when they dreamt a
relative had a mishap and she did but
they forget about all the times when a
relative was fine after they dreamt she
had a mishap or they think immigrants
commit a lot of crime because they read
it in the news about an immigrant who
robbed the store but don't think about
the larger number of stores robbed by
native-born citizens
confirmation bias is a common diagnosis
for human folly and a target for
enhancing rationality francis bacon
1561-1626
often credited with developing the
scientific method wrote of a man who was
taken to church and shown a painting of
sailors who had escaped the shipwreck
thanks to their holy vows i he remarked
but where are they painted that were
drowned after their vows he observed
such is the way of all superstitions
whether in astrology dreams omens divine
judgments of the like wherein men having
a delight in such vanities mark the
events where they are fulfilled
but where they fail although this
happened much often are neglect and pass
them by end quote from bacon
echoing a famous argument by the
philosopher karl popper most scientists
today insist that the dividing line
between science and pseudoscience is
whether advocates of a hypothesis
deliberately search for evidence that
could falsify it and accept the
hypothesis only if it survives end quote
this is also the only mention of poppa
in
pinker's book in rationality now i'm
going to now i'll agree with what pinker
says here and i won't read the part but
basically the the idea here is with the
wasson selection test including the one
about coins and the more classic example
involving p's and queues and stuff the
the issue is
that it's abstract that it if you bring
it into someone's real life thinking
about stuff then they tend to do better
you know it's well known that that
people are more interested in being able
to solve problems involving numbers
than doing algebra typically speaking
and when those numbers actually have a
dollar sign associated with them then
it's easier still because it means
something to them they care about it
if people don't care about the question
you're asking them they lose interest
they get bored and they switch off and
they don't do it it's got nothing to do
with their capacity i would suggest to
think more broadly about stuff this is
why iq tests are so dubious so many of
the questions so often are abstract i
took courses at university called logic
philosophical logic mathematical logic
so at the end you would think anyone who
went through this would be able to think
logically not necessarily i mean they
can manipulate the symbols and and go
through proofs that's what they can do
and a proof is a kind of computation
it's a mechanical process that you go
through starting with your axioms using
the rules of inference getting to the
conclusion but simply doing that doesn't
mean that you can necessarily apply
those things necessarily apply those
things in a good way to real life
problems and conversely if you're really
good at the real life problem that
doesn't mean that you can apply it in an
abstract way and pinker actually
explains this as he goes on to say
quote
suppose the post office sells 50 cent
stamps for third class mail but requires
ten dollar stamps for express mail that
is
properly addressed mail must follow the
rule
if a letter is labeled express mail it
must have a ten dollar stamp suppose the
label and the stamp don't fit on the
same side of the envelope so a postal
worker has to turn the envelopes over to
check to see if the sender has followed
the rule here are four envelopes imagine
that you are a postal worker which ones
do you have to turn over
[Music]
the correct answer is once again p and
not q
namely the express envelope and the one
with the 50 cent stamp
though the problem is logically
equivalent to the four coin problem or
the pq problem
this time almost everyone gets it right
the content of a logical problem matters
when an if then rule implements a
contract involving permissions and
duties if you enjoy a benefit you must
pay a cost
then a violation of the rule take the
benefit don't pay the cost is equivalent
to cheating and people intuitively know
what it takes to catch a cheater pause
there my reflection yes that's one
explanation okay and that's a very
concrete way of thinking about it or
just people are interested in this
you your
eye is captured by this your mind is
captured by this more readily
for the reasons of identifying a cheetah
perhaps or just the fact you're familiar
with these things you're familiar
manipulating things like envelopes and
stamps and coins and money we've been
trained since mother's knee on this but
not using p's and cues necessarily
thinking in abstract ways you have to be
specifically interested in those things
and then spend time learning about those
things finding those things fun to some
extent in order to be able to do them
reliably over and again okay so that's
the wasson selection test and i think it
illustrates i think that what pinker
does really well here is illustrate the
context matters the examples really do
matter which kind of makes these
uh academic ways of explaining what
critical thinking is
it sort of suggests that again you can
be really really proficient at so-called
logic and yet still be illogical in
various ways or be really logical in a
practical sense using envelopes let's
say but being unable to
do that in an abstract way reliably as
well and and it's not
you wouldn't label either person
perfectly rational perfectly logical
okay these are just labels that
apply in a particular context okay so
then he talks more about some logic more
about logic again i'll skip that because
that'll come into chapter three and so
we can spend more time on that but then
he gets to the very classic monty hall
problem something i've mentioned more
than once but here we've got some really
interesting historic context so let me
go to that because i wasn't aware of
this particular part of it and i think
one of the reasons is
well
i'm just not familiar with the monty
hall show i think i first heard about
this problem reading a book somewhere or
other it might have been you know so 20
years ago or something i read a book
that described the monty hall problem
but i i i wasn't culturally familiar
with the monty hall problem as i think
people in america are um so let's let
let's go through it the way pinker does
it okay um so this is from the book
quote one of the most famous television
game shows from the heyday of the genre
from the 1950s to the 1980s was let's
make a deal it's host monty hall
achieved a second kind of fame when a
dilemma in probability theory loosely
based on the show was named after him a
contestant is faced with three doors
behind one of them is a sleek new car
behind the other two of goats the
contestant picks a door say door one to
build suspense monty opens one of the
other two doors say door three revealing
a goat to build the suspense still
further he gives the contestant an
opportunity to either stick with their
original choice or to switch to the
unopened door you were the contestant
what should you do almost everyone stays
they figure that since the car was
placed behind one of the three doors at
random and door 3 has been eliminated
there is now a 50 50 chance
each that the car will be behind door 1
or door 2. though there's no harm in
switching they think there's no benefit
either so they stick with their first
choice out of inertia pride or
anticipation that their regret after an
unlucky switch would be more intense
than their delight after a lucky one
the monty hall dilemma became famous in
1990 when it was presented in the ask
maryland column in parade a magazine
inserted in the sunday edition of
hundreds of american newspapers the
columnist was marilyn vos savant known
at the time as the world's smartest
woman because of her entry in the
guinness book of world records for the
highest score on an intelligence test
vos savant wrote that you should switch
the odds of the car being behind door
two are two in three compared with one
and three for door one the column drew
ten thousand letters a thousand of them
from phds mainly in mathematics and
statistics most of whom said she was
wrong pausing their my reflection so
this is the path i didn't know about the
monty hall problem it's astonishing some
of this stuff that i read and we're
going to get a mention about paul
airdish here as well my understanding of
the monty hall problem the thing that
really
it just makes it clear for me is the and
i think pinker mentions this as well
many other people have mentioned sam
harris and various others
this idea that all you need to do is to
consider not three doors consider a
thousand doors you know if you consider
a thousand doors and you pick one of
them and then he closes
all other doors except for one what are
you gonna do you're gonna change or not
clearly you've been given information
you know you're gonna stick this one
door which has at the moment a one in a
thousand chance of being the correct
door behind which the car is and then
monty says well i'm going to close um
998 other doors okay and i'm going to
leave one do you still really think that
the chance that the car is behind your
door is one and two is that really the
way to think about it or is it one in a
thousand and now the other one is 999
out of a thousand that it's going to be
in fact the door behind which the car is
it seems pretty obvious you're being
given information so whether it's a
thousand doors or three doors you should
swap that is the mathematically rational
logical thing to do right
so i knew that but i didn't know this
part here's here are some examples says
pinker of the kind of responses that
uh the person in question what was her
name um
someone savant
marilyn vos savant
so although she explained what the
correct answer is
she had mathematics phds writing to her
here's one here's one of the responses
quote you blew it and you blew it big
was this donald trump you blew it and
you blew it big since you seem to have
difficulty grasping the basic principle
at work here i'll explain after the host
reveals a goat you now have a one in two
chance of being correct whether you
change your selection or not and the
odds are the same there is enough
mathematical literacy in this country we
don't need the world's highest iq
propagating more shame exclamation mark
end quote that was scott smith phd
university of florida i like that one
personally i like that one because it
sounds like
some youtube comments i've had over the
last couple of years
all right we'll go to the next one
pinker's quoted
quote i am sure you will receive many
letters on this topic from high school
and college students perhaps you should
keep a few addresses for help with
future columns
w robert smith phd georgia state
university
maybe women look at maths problems
differently than men
don edwards sunriver oregon
now now is the best best bit that pinker
gets into quote pink right among the
objectives was paul erdish
1913-1996 the renowned mathematician who
was so prolific that many academics
boast of their herdish number the length
of the shortest chain of co-authorships
linking them to the great theoretician
end quote so that's fantastic that's
absolutely fantastic you know that even
this guy that is really held up he's
famous among mathematicians he's famous
among anyone who's ever taken an
interest in mathematics if paul erdish
is writing in
to say that the correct answer is
actually wrong and doesn't understand
why that's phenomenal and well let's go
on because pinker explains what
eventually convinced erdish he was wrong
pinker writes
but the mansplaining
mathematicians were wrong and the
world's smartest woman was right you
should switch it's not that hard to see
why there are three possibilities for
where the car could have been placed
okay i'm not going to go through this is
me talking um what the answers are
because i've already explained that and
anyone who wants to can simply look it
up you should switch the chance of being
right
as marilyn vos savant said is two three
if you switch only one and three if you
stay
um
pinker goes on to say
certainly quote certainly there were
failures of critical thinking coming
from sexism ad hominem biases and
professional jealousy
vos savant is an attractive and stylish
woman with no initials after her name
who wrote for a recipe in gossip filled
rag and bantered on late night talk
shows she defied the stereotype of a
mathematician
and her celebrity and bragging rights
from guinness the guinness book of
records made her a big fat target for a
takedown
but part of the problem is the problem
itself like the teasers in the cognitive
reflection and watson selection tests
something about the monty hall dilemma
is designed to bring out the stupid in
our system one but in this case system
two is not much brighter people can't
swallow the correct explanation even
when it's pointed out to them this
included air dish who violating the soul
of a mathematician was convinced only
when he saw the game repeatedly
simulated
many persist even when they see it
simulated and even when they repeatedly
play for money what's the mismatch
between our intuitions and the laws of
chance a clue comes from the
over-confident justifications that the
know-it-alls offered for their blunders
sometimes thoughtlessly carried over
from other probability puzzles many
people insist that each of the unknown
alternatives in this case the unopened
doors
must have an equal probability that is
true of symmetrical gambling toys like
the faces of a coin or sides of a die
and it is reasonable start and and it is
a reasonable starting point when you
know absolutely nothing about the
alternatives but it is not a law of
nature okay pausing there
um yes so that's all quite right
fantastic well explained and and again
get the book because pinker goes into
even
more analysis of this particular problem
with with with the examples um
in the book he does go into a lot of
detail with
many of these
things um you know my preference would
be well you could you could probably
have have done it in in half the amount
of words but you know
as an introduction to let's say
rationality yes this level of detail is
is good
so that that there that analysis of the
monty hall problem by stephen pinker i
think is absolutely fantastic that's
that's worth the price of the book alone
because it does as much work as any
other example in the entire book to
illustrate the difference between
rationality and irrationality i think
and to really put a pin in this idea
that if you're a highly trained academic
and you're mathematically proficient
that somehow you can think more clearly
by virtue of the fact that you have
understanding in this specialized area
that this understanding of
mathematics of the ways of thinking
logically and paul erdish is second to
none in being able to think this way
that does not make you immune from
making errors even errors within your
own area of expertise and so people can
be irrational they can be completely
irrational even about the areas where
they're supposed to be experts that's
worth keeping in mind that's worth me
keeping in mind it's worth everyone
keeping in mind no matter what your
speciality is you can make terrible
blunders and we shouldn't be accusatory
of people or having a go at people on
the other side of the political aisle or
who have different ideas to us because
they're making a particular mistake
because you are just as fallible as they
are everyone
is
fallible and what the monty hall
problem
the history of the problem shows and
what um we're talking about there what
pink is talking about there is you know
having having this level of over
confidence
when it comes to something so simple and
that you can make
errors in something so simple even if
you're operating up here there's a
really high level and you think you
understand these rarefied areas of
mathematics but when it comes to this
the basics the absolute basics of
something like probability theory you
can make terrible mistakes but that
doesn't stop you making progress at the
really high level either okay so there's
there's a lot there's lots of ways you
could think about and analyze what's
going on here and i guess reflexively in
the spirit of that um
you know what i'm saying here about
the work of stephen finger i think it's
very good
but at the same time i think like paul
airdish
although it's his area of speciality i
think sometimes
in this very book he makes fundamental
egregious
errors to some extent let's go to one of
those let's go to just one of those uh
page 22 and 23
where he's talking about again
logic and probability and people might
be able to guess what i'm going to say
about this when i get there
so
what pinker does in this particular part
is to talk about the conjunction fallacy
the so-called conjunction fallacy so i'm
going to skip ahead to where he
describes it accurately and he uses
something from
zversky and kahneman and it's called the
the linda problem is what they have the
linda problem the linda problem works
well
but
earlier in the book pinka changes the
linda problem to something else and in
my opinion
ruins it
ruins it for important reasons
let's see the way that zvarsky and
kahneman
originally put the linda problem here we
go this is from their work quote linda
is 31 years old single outspoken and
very bright she majored in philosophy as
a student she was deeply concerned with
issues of discrimination and social
justice and also participated in
anti-nuclear demonstrations
please indicate the probability of each
of these statements
linda is a teacher in elementary school
linda is active in the feminist movement
linda is a psychiatric social worker
linda is a bank teller
linda is an insurance salesperson
linda is a bank teller and is active in
the feminist movement
respondents judged that it was likelier
that linda was a feminist bank teller
than that she was a bank teller once
again the probability of a and b would
judge to be higher than the probability
of a alone
the dated vignette with its baby boomer
linda backhanded compliment
bright passe protests and declining
occupation betrays its early 1980s
vintage
but as any psychology instructor knows
the effect is easily replicable and
today highly intelligent amanda who
marches for black lives matter is still
deemed to be likelier to be a feminist
registered nurse than a registered nurse
okay so pausing there my reflection yes
so this is this idea the conjunction
fallacy
that if you put these two things
together they seem to be more probable
than one of the things on their own
which mathematically is of course
impossible now the problem i have with
the way pinker does this that reading it
again actually that doesn't really work
for reasons i'll come to
um
i think the conjunction fallacy is fine
and whatever else but framing it in
terms of probability
is problematic
let's explain why
here we go this is what pinker says
earlier on in the book
he subtitles this a simple forecasting
problem quote once we get into the habit
of assigning numbers to unknown events
we can quantify intuitions about the
future forecasting events is a big
business it informs policy investment
risk management and ordinary curiosity
about what lies in store for the world
consider each of the following events
and write down your estimate of the
likelihood that it will take place in
the coming decade many of them are
pretty unlikely so let's make finer
distinctions at the lower end of the
scale and pick one of the following
probabilities for each
less than zero point one percent point
one percent point five percent one
percent two percent five percent ten
percent twenty-five percent and fifty
percent or more
so here are the claims
that pinker wants you to assign a
probability to
one
saudi arabia develops a nuclear weapon
two nicolas maduro resigns to president
of venezuela three russia has a female
president
four the world suffers a new and even
more lethal pandemic than covert
nineteen five vladimir putin is
constitutionally prevented from running
for another term as president of russia
and his wife takes his place on the
ballot allowing him to run the country
from the sidelines
six massive strikes and riots force
nicholas maduro to resign as president
of venezuela seven a respiratory virus
jumps from bats to humans in china and
starts a new and even more lethal
pandemic than covert 19 8 after iran
develops a nuclear weapon and tests it
in an underground explosion saudi arabia
develops its own nuclear weapon in
response end quote and the list of
things there that pinker puts there
now if you are familiar with the work of
david deutsch
and you have an understanding of
probability theory
then what can we say about this
absolutely none of them in the list are
matters of probability
they are all either going to happen or
not going to happen the probability in
each case if that's what you want to
call it is that thing will happen in our
timeline or that thing will not happen
in our timeline if it happens it happens
with probability one if it doesn't
happen and you die then throughout your
life the probability of having occurred
is zero it never would have happened
there's no um
change in the way in which your life
would have been lived or it was lived
which would change the fact that it
either happened or didn't happen things
happen or don't happen they don't happen
with a probability of 0.5 percent or 50
or anything like that number one on the
list is saudi arabia develops a nuclear
weapon what's the probability of it
happening is there a right answer to
this
if you put down the probability of it
happening is 50 what does that mean what
does it really mean
because it's either going to happen or
not
in the next hundred years or thousand
years or whatever
and if it happens it happens with
probability of 100 percent
whether it happens is completely
determined by the knowledge that people
in saudi arabia who are making the
decisions about to build a nuclear
weapon
actually construct that knowledge or not
if they construct the relevant nuclear
physics knowledge and they construct the
centrifuges and they manage to get hold
of the uranium or plutonium or whatever
then they can
develop a nuclear weapon but not
otherwise so far as we know this is what
is required in order to develop a
nuclear weapon and none of those things
are matters of probability but matters
of choice and constructing explanatory
knowledge in order to do so
it's not a matter of probability
now of course this is being a little
unfair to what pinker is doing because
what pinger is doing is trying to
illustrate a different kind of error the
error of this conjunction fallacy that
people tend to say things like for
example number two on the list nicholas
maduro resigned as a as president of
venezuela sometimes they will assign
that with a particular probability they
might say oh there's a 20 chance of that
happening
but then you go further down the list
and it's number six says massive strikes
and riots forced nicolas maduro to
resign as president of venezuela
well
people are signed that a higher
probability they might say 40 percent
because they've been told well massive
strikes and riots well
they they kind of think well that thing
will cause maduro to resign
but of course
the reason for maduro resigning is going
to reduce the
the probability according to this
particular way of analyzing things so
you should always assign a lower
probability for that conjunction of
things than you should for the thing
that is just standing on its own namely
his resignation as president for
whatever reason has to be
higher there's a the the the reasons for
it occurring
and it will occur
it will occur for some reason it's going
to occur he's going to resign well
either he's going to die in office or
he's going to resign or be voted out or
something right he's going to leave
office for some reason
but if you were going to assign a
probability for that i would say 100
eventually he's not going to be present
ever he's not going to be president for
whatever reason
given a particular reason
you know the um the massive
strikes and riots has to bring that
probability down when you put those
things together that's what pink is
saying here so i'm being unfair to him
because you know that's all he's trying
to say here but
there are other ways of talking about
this conjunction fallacy which don't
require you to talk about things that
aren't matters of probability and
especially in a course at a university
where you're doing critical thinking or
rationality i would hope that um
students would be comfortable putting up
their hands saying but none of these are
matters of probability
they're not you know they're they're
either going to happen or not going to
happen we don't live in a world where
things happen
probabilistically
and that includes by the way the
flipping of coins subjectively
yeah subjectively you don't know
you know that it's going to land heads
or tails but when you do flip it and it
lands well it's landed with
heads and that you live in a universe
where the probability of it beforehand
was in fact in fact
100 that it was going to be heads
because the laws of physics uh
determined that's what was going to
happen but subjectively you just didn't
have the relevant information anyway
it's too far a field from what we're
doing in this book of course but just to
turn the mirror of rationality back on
to professor pinker for a moment
okay and as we move towards the
end of the chapter
chapter one i've sort of i haven't read
much i've talked more about it than i
read
we get to cognitive illusions and i
would say to you buy the book for that
it's really interesting things to say
about how these illusions in my words
anyway some of these illusions i'll put
a picture on the page
really are about the
extent to which
our prior knowledge affects what we
perceive what we see
or in other words as popper would say
observations are theory laden so i'll
skip most of that but just to say that
if we're writing a book on rationality
why you would
skip
critical rationalism the preeminent
way in which people
should be the normative claim they
should be
thinking rationally i don't know why
you'd skip poppa because popper explains
that sort of thing these these kind of
illusions that appear
in the book here namely this one here
and there's so many like this you know
the the you know the dress example is
one but here's another one where
the the dark area here and the light
area here in fact aren't dark and light
they are exactly the same color it's an
optical illusion and what poppa would
say as well observations are theory
later now our very senses themselves are
expecting a certain thing and so our
brain causes us to see
something which is illusory
and the way that pinker frames this is
of course well in real life in real life
when you see
something like that a box like that
indeed you do see the front of it as
being darker than the back of it and so
forth because there's such a thing as
shadows okay so i'm skipping through to
chapter two chapter two and chapter 2 is
titled rationality and irrationality he
begins with a complaint
that rationality is supposedly uncool
and i guess this depends on what circles
you mix in i know when i was at school
myself as a student myself yes the words
geek and nerd were pejorative but i know
for a fact now certainly in some schools
maybe the better ones that i've been
familiar with anyway they're now badges
of honour
there are subcultures of kids who are
nerds and geeks and so on who are
exalted as being the popular and the
cool kids that's just the way it is the
kids exist in subcultures some kids want
to be geeks now they aspire to be you
know the next generation of elon musk's
and bill gates and why not i mean that's
where the money is if that's the way in
which you want to be successful so i
think that's changed over the last few
decades he does go on to make some
remarks that of course i'll agree with
about the poverty of post-modernism all
of that's quite well
but then we get to this
so i'm skipping the first part of the
chapter
and he writes okay he's he's got a sub
section titled reasons for reason
and he asked the question
what is rationality
as with most words in common usage no
definition can stipulate its meaning
exactly and the dictionary just leads us
in a circle most define rational as
having reason but reason itself comes
from the latin retion
often described as reason
a definition that is more or less
faithful to the way the word is used is
the ability to use knowledge to attain
goals knowledge in turn
is standardly defined as justified true
belief
end quote so
he takes this
uncontroversially okay so this is just
assumed true
throughout the book
and because it is then we can have a
book about rationality
and the rational ways in which we can
try and
justify as true
our beliefs and if you're not adequately
justifying things
then this is irrational
and indeed he goes on to say quote
straight after that after saying that
knowledge is justified true belief this
is the standard
definition he writes quote
we would not credit someone with being
rational
if they acted on beliefs that they were
known to be false such as looking for
their keys in a place they knew the keys
could not be or if those beliefs could
not be justified if they came say from a
drug-induced vision or a hallucinated
voice rather than observation of the
world or inference from some other
belief end quote
yes the example's correct but the
explanation for the example is not the
explanation for the example is not
as i said earlier
there are all sorts of ways in which you
can act
now i won't use the word belief but you
can act on knowledge you know to be
false
you don't indeed you don't have to
believe it at all
newton's theory of gravity
newton's theory of gravity newtonian
mechanics
you can know it to be false
and therefore you should not believe it
because you know it's false
but
it can be perfectly rational to act upon
it
for example in
building a bridge
in
launching a rocket you can use this not
because it is strictly speaking true
let alone justified true
or that you believe it
but because it solves a particular
problem
that's what it's about
if you are seeking to solve your
problems
and
in doing that correcting
errors to the extent the errors need to
be corrected
that's rational
and of course it's not a matter of
beliefs whatever beliefs are
i struggle to really understand what
this concept of belief
seems to be on the one hand
you look up a dictionary and it's
defined as being something like those
things you regard as being true
so known to be true or whatever
in other moods people tend to use the
word to mean something lesser than the
word no but as i have emphasized here
you should be using the word no for
things that you think could be false
i know newton's law of gravity
i also know that it's false
okay knowing something doesn't mean that
you think that it's actually true
it might simply mean well it's the best
explanation that i have but not always
it could just mean that you know it even
though you know that it's false but
believe if i say i believe something i
believe the sky is blue
then on the one hand it might mean you
really really think that the sky is blue
like i believe in god when people say i
believe in god they think i really
really think that god exists in fact
it's often the one thing that they
refuse to give up on it's the thing that
they endorse as being true more than
anything else
but other times when you say believe
it can have a completely different
meaning well not a completely different
meaning but if i say
i believe my mother's in the next room
where's mum
i believe she's in the next room that
indicates a lack of certainty rather
than certainty
this for me this means that belief
shouldn't be a part of epistemology
epistemology is about knowledge and we
can
more
carefully constrain what we understand
the word knowledge to mean
following papa following deutsch without
ever being concerned about what this
term belief is about what anyone thinks
on the matter any particular person it's
about the extent to which the errors
have been corrected and knowledge of
course unlike beliefs is something that
can be instantiated in objects
that that a book doesn't believe
anything but it absolutely contains
knowledge it contains knowledge that can
be transmitted from one place to another
but then he goes on to talk about more
about beliefs now i think
this is what i suppose can also make the
book
valuable for anyone as i flagged early
on if you felt like you missed out on a
course
at harvard university on epistemology or
critical thinking or rationality or from
any one of the other you know top
universities whether in the ivory the
ivy league universities in the united
states or
you know oxford or cambridge if you
think you missed out on philosophy if
you think you missed out on the absolute
best teaching that's out there
then this book contains
some of that i think it's useful to know
what is being taught and what
the content of epistemology is
in these institutions and is commonly
thought to be
critical thinking and so on
so it's an excellent it's an excellent
summary the book is an excellent summary
of
critical thinking rationality as
understood
in academic circles
as as we notice here this is such a
perfect example and david deutsche has
observed this before
when you read these kind of books it's
as if
papa had never existed it's as if he
just
he's not the key philosopher involved in
epistemology
we see it there this is a wonderful
example of where
papa gets invoked
how
falsification of course you know he he
was the guy that figured out that
what science is about is falsifying
ideas rather than verifying as true
ideas confirming its trilogies and this
is the extent to which your university
academic and professor broadly speaking
even if they're engaged in philosophy of
science even if they're engaged
ostensibly in epistemology this is what
they think poppa contributed
you don't need to write multiple books
of that length there
as papa did
and essays and lectures and so on and so
forth to just make that point
that's
not what his corpus of
contribution to philosophy
and science
and epistemology is it is far broader
and deeper than that
and it really matters it really matters
on this point about
knowledge being justified true belief
why
because
if we need to have justified truths
in order to claim something is actually
known
then we readily slide
in to dogmatism or relativism
and pinker will know this
better than anyone i suppose or as well
as anyone
that
if you can't justify as true something
and people quickly realize they can't
really justify something as true as
absolutely true and so because of this
what happens
when they fail to do so and they will
fail to do so
in the university context what do they
do they fall into relativism they fall
into post-modernism they go well it's
all pointless you can't in science
justify that theory is true after all
science is always overturning its
theories therefore nothing is absolutely
true therefore
everything stands on all fours with
everything else
let's just be relativists because
nothing can ultimately be shown to be
true
this mistake only comes about because
people think that to know something
means to justify it as true serious
problem affects the universities it's an
entire philosophy that comes from i
would argue that
central mistake of thinking that
knowledge is about trying to justify as
true something and it's not now on the
other hand on the flip side if you're
not in the university if you're not in
the rarefied areas of university and
coming to this realization yourself
then what you do is you go down the
other equally false route of thinking
well the only way to justify things is
true is to be dogmatic if it's written
in the holy book or somewhere else
if the scientist says it then it's
justified as true you become a dogmatist
then you you rely on authoritarianism
the authority of the person who is
in possession of that ultimate truth the
dogmatists will say to you it's
justified as true because it's written
in this book
or it's been peer reviewed
or
this priest has said
and so on and so forth this expert has
said
then i'm justified in thinking this is
true therefore i can say i know it
both of these things are equally false
it's wrong to say
that there is no truth because you can't
justify things as true it's wrong to say
that everything else is false other than
what the people who are the experts and
authorities say is actually justified as
being true that's what we know no
papa dismisses both of these and says
it's not about justifying things as true
it's not about justifying beliefs is
true forget all of that
knowledge is conjectural you guess it
you error correct you look for the
problems in what you hear the two know
correct the errors identify better
solutions and therefore make progress
and along the way you say i know this
thing either as my best explanation of
reality or i know this thing to be false
or i know this thing to be false but
useful this is what knowledge is
knowledge is useful information
knowledge is that information which
tends to get itself copied knowledge is
that stuff which once instantiated in
some sort of physical substrate tends to
cause itself to remain so knowledge is
resilient information all of these are
similar ways of circling the same idea
but at no point do we need to say they
are justified as true nor does anyone
have to believe
them that's wonderful that's unique
that's different and why it doesn't
inform
books on rationality courses on critical
thinking i don't know because it's a
much better razer
in terms of being able to slice through
the bs that exists on either the side of
the dogmatists or the relativists
you only get this problem of dogmatism
and relativism if you go down the
platonic road okay plato's idea that you
need to be able to justify us through
your beliefs
that's an error and it causes
so many other problems so this is not
this is why i'm focusing on it and why
i'm ranting about it right now this is
not a minor academic problem it is very
serious it affects academia but it
affects
broad
normal day-to-day life discourse in the
world out there we've got religious
fundamentalists on the one hand causing
problems for everyone and
post-modernists on the other are causing
problems for everyone as well
popper is needed it
because
these ideas affect people's behaviors
so i think that you know opportunities
are missed to explain papa to a broader
audience we know that stephen pinker has
read and respects david deutch so he
could have gone back to the beginning of
infinity that
he he read he says uh for enlightenment
now he could have just referenced
something from that book about knowledge
but all of that said okay so i've
i've um criticized uh stephen pinker
great stephen pinker i think he's great
he does excellent work you know again
he's an ally but
that's why i think that should he write
more books on this topic and hopefully
he does he he goes back and reads what
popper has to say and promotes popular
little more but he does get he gets
objective truth right let me skip to um
page 40 now so let me go ahead and he
writes this
quote
now arguments for truth objectivity and
reason may stick in the craw because
they seem dangerously arrogant
who the hell are you to claim to have
absolute truth
but that's not what the case for
rationality is about the psychologist
david myers has said that the essence of
a monotheistic belief is one there is a
god and two it's not me and it's also
not you
the secular equivalent is there is
objective truth and two i don't know it
and neither do you
the same epistemic humility applies to
rationality that leads to truth perfect
rationality and objective truth are
aspirations that no mortal can ever
claim to have attained but the
conviction that they are out there
licenses us to develop rules we can all
abide by that allow us to approach the
truth collectively in ways that are
impossible for any of us individually
pausing now my reflection yes
but an opportunity has been missed here
so the final ultimate absolute truth
is unobtainable but it's out there
but this can also cause people to fall
into relativism if you say that if you
express it in in that way what you
immediately need to follow it up with is
nonetheless objective knowledge
objective knowledge is absolutely
possible
it's not the final word it's not
justified as true it's knowledge it's
useful information it's knowledge that
solves information solves a problem
that's what objective knowledge is it
either objectively solves the problem or
it doesn't that's a true or false claim
and that is easily noticed in the world
so it can get confusing if on the one
hand the
instructor
at the front of the critical thinking or
rational rationalist course rationalism
course says
to the cohort of students hey guess what
there's this thing called knowledge it's
justified true belief how do we justify
as true our beliefs hmm
well we can't in the next breath we
can't actually get to the absolute
justified objective truth
so must mean that knowledge isn't quite
possible either but hey
we can
follow methods of rationality that lead
to the truth
all of this gets confusing and i
understand why an undergraduate or even
a graduate coming out of such course
might be confused and fall into a
dangerous form of lazy relativism
what we need is to be able to tell
people guess what
despite
this inability to get to the final truth
correct stephen pinker we can't get to
the final truth there is such a thing as
objective knowledge knowledge that could
be wrong it has the possibility of being
wrong of being shown wrong but until
such time as actually is
shown wrong and it has proved thus far
to solve our problems we regard it as
actual
knowledge
it's objective knowledge objective
because it could be shown false and when
it is
sometimes it still
maintains its usefulness as knowledge
newton's theory okay the rest of uh the
chapter there's more material rightly
criticizing relativism and
post-modernism
uh with a slant he's kind of got a slant
here in the book and in this chapter
about our present circumstance where
people are obsessed with various phobias
and isms to do with race and class and
gender and sexuality yes absolutely so
um
it's
it to me it it very much as i say it's
like notes for a lecture at a university
okay this is what the university
uh and i guess the media in various
places are um kind of focused on right
now these this race class gender
sexuality stuff
um and so
the the examples there
circle that and so it's useful for
certainly an undergraduate going through
university or again someone who would
like to be familiar with what might be
talked about in lectures at a modern
university these days now he does spend
lots of the chapter defending reason
against unreason i suppose um
like sometimes i'm left wondering who
he's debating like who are these people
out there that are arguing against
reason
um you know even people that we disagree
with even as i say the religious
fundamentalist terrorists they would
think they're back they're behaving
rationally and reasonably they've just
taken on the wrong idea right if if the
idea is
if you blow yourself up in a suicide
bombing you're going to go to paradise
and this is the most
holy and good thing that you can do with
your life
it's rational to do it okay we might
think it's evil and wrong and whatever
and we need to go deeper and to
criticize his original ideas namely
thinking that particular
ancient books contain the final truth
okay that's a problem but once you
accept that false premise other things
fall out logically many people have made
this point before i think in
this kind of book it's enough to say
that reason works
unreason doesn't reason leads to solving
your problems
to
making progress
unreason does quite the opposite okay it
leads to static societies and you can't
correct your errors because you're not
aiming at correcting your errors so he
gets to a point in the book in chapter
two
where he
asks the question
quote must we always follow reason do i
need a rational argument for why i
should fall in love cherish my children
enjoy the pleasures of life isn't it
sometimes okay to go crazy to be silly
to stop making sense if rationality is
so great why do we associate it with a
dour joylessness
was the philosophy professor in tom
stoppard's play jumpers right in his
response to the claim that the church is
a monument to irrationality and then he
quotes the play quote the national
gallery is a monument to irrationality
every concert hall is a monument to
irrationality and so is a nicely kept
garden or a lover's favor or a home for
stray dogs if rationality were the
criterion for things being allowed to
exist the world would be one gigantic
field of soybeans
end quote from the play
the rest of this chapter takes up the
professor's challenge we will see that
while beauty and love and kindness are
not literally rational they're not
exactly irrational either we can apply
reason to our emotions and to our morals
and there is even a higher order
rationality that tells us when it can be
rational to be irrational pausing there
my reflection
as i say if you embrace the idea that
rationality is more about
correcting errors and making progress
you don't fall into this debate so much
is
love rational is keeping a gut let's
make it even easier
is keeping a garden rational absolutely
why well if it's fun it's rational why
because as we like to say around here
reason is fun
there's
absolutely nothing wrong with enjoying
life
that should be the purpose and how do
you enjoy life by continually solving
your problems correcting errors making
personal progress in whatever way
you think you should the meaning of life
is
solving your problems and if you fail to
continue to solve your problems you will
become unhappy and ultimately you will
die if you can't solve that problem at
the end there
and i think
uh professor pinker does make this point
in in the book
around about this time
that well it's wrong to think that there
is this
opposition between reason and emotion
that makes no sense a lot of people have
made that error over time
i remember um
sam harris would talk about this as well
that
you know people would accuse him of
being overly rational for whatever
reason
and that you know you might not be able
to prove that god exists but that's
being too rational after all can you
prove
that you love your children
well it's a ridiculous question okay in
neither case is it about proof i would
say in the first place
but what we're really looking for is
explanations and rational explanations
on non-rational explanations and it's
perfectly
rational
to have a good explanation of why you
would love your children or you would
want a garden and so on and so forth all
these things that people enjoy it
doesn't make them irrational
it doesn't make it irrational just
because you enjoy something you could
jump out of an aeroplane okay you could
be one of these people who likes going
skydiving
that
does not make it irrational it can be
fun
is rationality
having fun is rational having fun is
perfectly rational what's the
alternative not to have fun that would
be irrational wouldn't it just to avoid
fun all the time again this is why
reason is fun right
doing stuff that involves reason is
actually fun and part of
perhaps the central part of life
for more on that see of course the work
of lily tanet among others and david's
the fun criterion
now chapter two also invokes
the wonderful teaching the horse to talk
example which is in the beginning
affinity as well
and we also get in this chapter
being a cognitive scientist a
psychologist of course this idea of the
the marshmallows can you wait for
the marshmallow in the hope that you'll
get two in the future or do you want to
eat the marshmallow now and
psychologists make a lot of this because
children when
offered a single marshmallow but told
don't eat the marshmallow now
wait 10 minutes and i'll give you two
some of them eat it and some of them
don't it's impulse but all of these kind
of examples just like as
pinka says elsewhere in these first two
chapters that it's in a sense more
rational to save money now for your
future than spend it now in many many
cases but then later on
he does double back on that and goes
well it kind of depends
on well he doesn't use these words but
it depends on what your problem problem
situation is at any time
okay if you
of course have sickness ill health
something like that then you might very
well need to spend all of your money now
your savings now rather than save for
the future you might need to cure an
illness that you have right now there's
many situations like this in which
using up the resources now rather than
saving for the future is the more
rational thing to do
neither of these things that you can't
make a black and white claim about
what to do with money resources
marshmallows right now
if you're really hungry as a kid in that
experiment then having the marshmallow
right now makes more sense than the kid
who's just eaten breakfast they might be
able to wait more easily for 10 minutes
because
and the kid who has
low blood sugar diabetes might really
might really be very rational for them
to have the marshmallow immediately
rather than wait 10 minutes for two
marshmallows when they're full and
unconscious
okay
um i don't think i'll read the rest of
this chapter it's good okay there's but
there's lots of stuff there about
tax and carbon and pollution
which makes me think and again it sort
of stands in contrast to some other
things that stephen pinker writes
about how good the present is he's kind
of suggesting
that
the present isn't that good
because when it comes to pollution this
is a standard example the past was
extremely polluted
all the ways in which the water supply
was polluted
uh or in which we couldn't which we
couldn't deal with bushfires or forest
fires and so the air used to get more
polluted now of course in the industrial
revolution the air was even worse but
by any metric today
in many many places
the area is far cleaner than what it was
a few decades ago i know in the united
states it's certainly like this
yeah of course china is coming up and
burning lots and lots of coal and
they're putting lots of rubbish into the
atmosphere yes but there's a
transitional phase they'll get through
this and then their air will be as clean
as the united states and australia and
so on and so forth once you once you get
to the point where you have
nice clean coal or other clean forms of
energy nuclear and so on then your your
air will become clear and of course and
of course
car technology a major contributor to
making air look grimy and dirty and
having these little particles well
things can get better things can get so
much better if you just improve the
technology with transportation means of
transportation but i might just end it
on
pinker talks about
how we can't get an ought from an ears
and you know this is david hume fork now
he makes a big deal about this
he thinks that it's false it's true you
can't get naught from an ears
um
but
as david deutsch points out and that's
the key point many people miss it's a
key point that many people miss in the
philosophy and epistemology of david
deutsch his great insight is
explanations are not derived in the
first place they're guessed it's what
you get this from papa which means not
only can't you get an ought from an is
you can't get an is from an ears either
okay that's just not the way that
explanations work that's not the way
that science works
the mistake is you know you don't just
look at photons of light falling down to
the earth and go oh those photons mean
that it is the case that general
relativity is true or that
light is made of photons or that light
is a wave or any anything else of
interest in science
just because you see something is the
case
does not mean you can get the
explanation of what is the case
the explanation has to be creatively
conjectured and then measured against
the experimental
observations that you make this is an
encounter between what we imagine to be
the case and what we measure and observe
to be the case as well so
whenever you hear
people make a big deal about you can't
get a naught from an ears true you can't
get an ought from an ears but you can't
get issues from his either you don't
derive morality from what is the case in
the natural world but you don't derive
what's true in science philosophy or
anything else from what is the case in
the natural world either
so that's where end it today now in
summary
for these first two chapters
an excellent overview
of rationality
as i imagine
it is still taught in the university
context with lots of contemporary
examples drawn from
news stories and the culture of today
and extremely well written
as well
so
very useful for people who are new to
this idea of critical thinking
but if you've read
popper and deutsche
you might find as i did that on every
other page there was something that you
kind of
raised your eyebrows ahead and thought
there might have been a better way to
have expressed this or this could have
been better informed
certainly by the epistemology known as
critical rationalism which i think is
the greatest bulwark against
irrationality
until next time bye
[Music]